Docs for customizable Admin components (#2030)
vivid-planet/comet: docs/docs/comet-core-development/creating-customizable-admin-components.md

---

> title: Creating customizable admin components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Creating customizable Admin components
```

IMO Admin should be uppercase

---

MUI components support multiple ways of customization.
You can override the styles of individual component instances or style them globally using the theme.
You can also use the theme to override those components' default props.

All Comet Admin components should also support these features.

> For examples of how those features should be able to be used, see the [Customization and Styling](/docs/admin-components/customization-and-styling).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those features should be useable as described in [Customization and Styling](/docs/admin-components/customization-and-styling).
```

Maybe like this?

## Basics

Generally, a Comet Admin component should export the following in the `index.ts` file:

-   The component itself, with a unique name
-   The props type, named as the component, followed by `Props`
-   The class key type, named as the component, followed by `ClassKey`

```tsx
export { MyComponent, MyComponentProps, MyComponentClassKey } from "./src/MyComponent";
```

## Class keys

> A components `ClassKey` type defines all the individual elements (or slots) of a component or a modifier/alternative style of a component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A component's `ClassKey` type defines all the individual elements (or slots) of a component and all modifiers/alternative styles of a component.
```

The outermost slot of a component is generally called `root`.

```tsx
export type MyComponentClassKey = "root" | "title";
```

## Slots

> Each element or sub-component of a Comet Admin component is defined as a slot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each element or subcomponent of a Comet Admin component is defined as a slot.
```

I believe sub is usually used without a hyphen

> A slot is created and styled by using `createComponentSlot()` and passing in the HTML element or component you want to be the base of your slot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A slot is created and styled by using `createComponentSlot()` and passing in the HTML element or component you want to base your slot on.
```

Additionally, the component's name must be passed in, as well as the slot's name, as defined in the class key type.

```tsx
const Root = createComponentSlot("div")<MyComponentClassKey>({
    componentName: "MyComponent",
    slotName: "root",
})(
    ({ theme }) => css`
        background-color: ${theme.palette.primary.main};
    `,
);

const Title = createComponentSlot(Typography)<MyComponentClassKey>({
    componentName: "MyComponent",
    slotName: "title",
})(css`
    color: lime;
`);
```

## Defining the props type

The props type of Comet Admin components must extend `ThemedComponentBaseProps`.
As a generic, an object must be passed in with the slot's name as the keys and the type of their base element or component as values.

```tsx
export interface MyComponentProps
    extends ThemedComponentBaseProps<{
        root: "div";
        title: typeof Typography;
    }> {
    variant?: "primary" | "secondary";
    children?: React.ReactNode;
}
```

## Using props

Props should not be used directly but through the `useThemeProps` hook instead.

> This ensures that the components `defaultProps` from the theme are merged with the passed-in props.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ensures that the component's `defaultProps` from the theme are merged with the passed-in props.
```

Note that the name passed to the `useThemeProps` hook must be the same as the component's name, prefixed with `CometAdmin`.

```tsx
export function MyComponent(inProps: MyComponentProps) {
    const { children, variant } = useThemeProps({ props: inProps, name: "CometAdminMyComponent" });
    return (
        // ...
    )
}
```

## `slotProps` and `restProps`

To allow overriding the props of each slot, the `slotProps` object should be spread into each slot.
Additionally, the `sx` and `className` props should be passed into the root slot, for example with `...restProps`.

```tsx
export function MyComponent(inProps: MyComponentProps) {
    const { slotProps, ...restProps } = useThemeProps({
        props: inProps,
        name: "CometAdminMyComponent",
    });
    return (

>         <Root {...slotProps?.root} {...restProps}>

Reviewer 2: Should the slotProps always be the first prop?

Author: Generally `slotProps` and `restProps` should be last, so props defined inside the component can be overridden. 
Exceptions would be props that should never be overridden. 

I will add this info to the docs as well 👍🏼

            <Title {...slotProps?.title} />
        </Root>
    );
}
```

## Owner state

> The `ownerState` is an object that includes all values that should impact the component's styling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ownerState` is an object that includes all values that can impact the component's styling.
```

It is passed into every slot that requires any of these values for its styling.

```tsx
type OwnerState = {
    highlighted: boolean;
};

const Root = createComponentSlot("div")<MyComponentClassKey, OwnerState>({
    componentName: "MyComponent",
    slotName: "root",
})(
    ({ theme, ownerState }) => css`
        ${ownerState.highlighted &&
        css`
            background-color: ${theme.palette.primary.main};
        `}
    `,
);

export function MyComponent(inProps: MyComponentProps) {
    // ...
    const ownerState: OwnerState = {
        highlighted: getHighlightedState(),
    };

    return <Root ownerState={ownerState} {...slotProps?.root} {...restProps} />;
}
```

> ## A slots `classesResolver`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## A slot's `classesResolver`
```

> By default, a slots class name consists of the component and slot names, prefixed with `CometAdmin`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, a slot's class name consists of the component and slot names, prefixed with `CometAdmin`.
```

For example, the `root` slot of `MyComponent` would have the class name `CometAdminMyComponent-root`, while the `title` slot would have the class name `CometAdminMyComponent-title`.

Additional class names can be added to a slot by returning an array of class keys in `classesResolver()`.

> This allows easy customization using its class name in a selector outside the component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows easy customization using the resulting class name in a selector outside the component.
```

In the following example, a component has a conditional `highlighted` state.
If `true`, the class name `CometAdminMyComponent-highlighted` is added to the `root` slot by returning the `highlighted` class key in `classesResolver`.

> If `false`, `classesResolver` returns an empty array, so no additional class name is added.

Reviewer: This isn't true. The array isn't empty, but `[false]` instead. Could this lead to problems?

<img width="319" alt="image" src="https://github.com/vivid-planet/comet/assets/48853629/e8cea44e-027f-4baf-8ca3-d0e12850276f">

Author: Good point, will re-write this. 

> Could this lead to problems?

No, `falsy` values are filtered out:

https://github.com/vivid-planet/comet/blob/89092f9e2b983cc689d6d2238d46ec4930992aa9/packages/admin/admin/src/helpers/createComponentSlot.tsx#L38

All Comet Admin components should also support these features.

> Those features should be useable as described in [Customization and Styling](/docs/admin-components/customization-and-styling).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those features should be usable as described in [Customization and Styling](/docs/admin-components/customization-and-styling).
```

Shouldn't this be usable?
